Objective

To characterize the current gender and subspecialty of those holding academic departmental administrative and educational leadership roles in urology.

Methods

We conducted a cross-sectional observational study of U.S. Urology Residency Programs in 2016-2017. Inclusion criteria were participation in the Urology Residency Match Program and having a department of urology website. From June 1, 2016 to August 20, 2016, each department's website was queried. If information was missing or unclear, we reviewed faculty biographies and contacted residency program coordinators.

Results

We queried 124 urology residency programs. For administrative leadership roles, women comprised 3.3% of chairs, 4.5% of vice chairs, and 7.9% of division directors. For educational leadership roles, women comprised 9.4% of fellowship directors, 8.1% of residency directors, and 27.4% of medical student clerkship directors. The most common subspecialties for chairs included oncology (49.2%), endourology (16.4%), and female urology (7.4%). Among division directors, female urology had the highest representation of women (27.8%) followed by pediatric urology (9.8%), reconstruction (5%), endourology (4.3%), and andrology (4%).

Conclusion

Overall, women are disproportionately underrepresented when it comes to educational and administrative positions of urology departmental leadership. There is also a wide yet narrowing gender gap as more women are pursuing careers in this field. Given this upward trend we may see more women in positions of leadership over time. Future efforts should be made to help promote the advancement of women to positions of leadership.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Medicine has been a historically male-dominated field; however, the presence of women continues to rise. Currently, women comprise approximately half of medical students and incoming residents.1 Specific to urology, there has been a recent and rapid increase in women pursuing a career in this surgical subspecialty. According to the American Urological Association 2016 census data, 7.7% of practicing urologists are women in comparison with only 2% in 1980. Furthermore, 17.2% of current urologists 45 years of age or under are women.2 Higher percentage of females observed in the younger age group gives evidence that more women are entering the urologic workforce in the United States. For the 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 Urology Residency Match, female representation was 20% and 26% respectively.3 There has not been a difference in successful match rate between men and women, extending back to at least 1996.4

Despite the increasing presence of women in medicine, there continues to be a disparity and a discrepancy when it comes to those that rise to positions of academic leadership. According to the Association of American Medical Colleges, the overall proportion across all medical specialties of women in the leadership roles of department chair (14%), vice chair (22%), and division director (22%) remains low.5 Even in obstetrics and gynecology (OB-GYN), which has the most women residents, faculty, and department chairs, men continue to hold most departmental leadership roles. Women represent only 20% of departmental chairs in OB-GYN.6 A 2016 study comparing female representation in OB-GYN with 8 other specialties found that women were also underrepresented in major departmental leadership roles in General Surgery, Internal Medicine, Neurology, Pathology, Pediatrics, and Psychiatry. Representation was calculated as the ratio of women in leadership roles in 2013 to the proportion of female residents in 1990, and found that women were significantly underrepresented across all specialties as chairpersons, and as division directors in all fields except for Anesthesiology and Diagnostic Radiology. However, women were significantly overrepresented as residency program directors in General Surgery, Anesthesiology, OB-GYN, and Pediatrics, with General Surgery claiming the most unbalanced representation7 Surgical subspecialties such as Otolaryngology and Neurosurgery maintain the trend that women more frequently act as program directors compared with chairpersons8 We were interested to see the representation of women among positions of leadership in urology, a predominantly male-dominated field with a rising influx of women. The objective of this study is to characterize the gender and subspecialty of those holding positions of academic and educational leadership in US departments of urology.

Materials and Methods
We conducted a cross-sectional observational study. Programs were eligible if they had a residency accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education registered in the 2015-2016 US Urology Residency Match Program and a department of urology website. Military-based programs were excluded. From June 1, 2016, to August 20, 2016, each department, division, and section of urology website was queried.

We searched for those serving as chair, vice chair, as well as division, fellowship, and medical school clerkship director. Gender was determined by name and confirmed by photo and pronoun use when available. Subspecialty information was retrieved by reviewing fellowship training and area of concentration. If that information was not readily available on the department of urology website, we searched their curriculum vitae or biography. Those without an obvious subspecialty were categorized as practicing general urology. Those serving interim positions were included in the study.

If information was either unclear or missing from a department's website, we attempted to retrieve it by contacting the program through phone call or email with program coordinators.

Results
For the 2015-2016 Urology Residency Match, 124 non–military-accredited urology residency programs met the eligibility criteria for our study.

In urology departmental administrative roles, women comprised 3.3% (4 of 122) of department chairs, 4.5% (2 of 44) of vice chairs, and 7.9% (20 of 253) of division directors. For 2 of the 124 programs, there was no identifiable chair. In educational leadership roles, women comprised 9.4% (14 of 149) of fellowship directors, 8.1% (10 of 123) of residency directors, and 27.4% (23 of 84) of clerkship directors (Fig. 1).

Figure?1
Download high-res image (78KB)Download full-size image
Figure?1. Percentage of women in various department-based leadership roles in urology.

Among urology subspecialties, the greatest proportion of department chairs including both men and women were oncology faculty 49.2% (61 of 124), followed by endourology 16.4% (20 of 124), female urology 7.4% (9 of 124), and andrology 7.4% (9 of 124). The remainder of subspecialties had less than 6% representation, with the lowest being neurourology 0.8% (1 of 124), renal transplant 3.3% (4 of 124), and pediatric urology 4.1% (5 of 124) (Fig. 2).

Figure?2
Download high-res image (77KB)Download full-size image
Figure?2. Chairperson categorized by urology subspecialty. (Color version available online.)

Among division directors, the highest proportion of women were seen in female urology 27.8% (10 of 36) and pediatric urology 9.8% (6 of 61). The following subspecialties in descending order included reconstruction 5.0% (1 of 20), endourology 4.3% (2 of 47), and andrology 4.0% (1 of 25). There were no female division directors for general urology, oncology, renal transplant, or neurourology (Fig. 3).

Figure?3
Download high-res image (78KB)Download full-size image
Figure?3. Percentage of female division directors in various urology subspecialties. (Color version available online.)

Comment
This study highlights the disproportionate underrepresentation of women in urology across all positions of academic and educational leadership. Although there is a lack of women who hold positions of such leadership in all medical specialties, it appears more pronounced in urology. Women represented only 3.3% of urology department chairs compared with 14% across all medical specialties. A recent descriptive analysis of chairman in academic urologic practice similarly found that the proportion of male chairs is even higher than the proportion of male urologists in the field.9 Reason for the disproportionally low representation is not clear but may have association with the longstanding widened gender gap in urology. Why there is such an exaggerated gender gap in urology is also unclear but is likely multifactorial, specialty-specific barriers to female entry including lack of mentorship during medical school, lack of exposure to urology, perceptions regarding the practice and predominant patient demographic, and the inherent sensitivity dealing with pathologies of the genitourinary tract.4

Despite the lag of female representation in urology, the gender gap is narrowing. There is an increase in women pursuing a career in urology, with an 11-fold increase comparing 2009-2013 with 1978-1982. Urology has the greatest growth for women in training across all specialties.4 American Urological Association residency match data also show a consistent equal successful match rate over the past 2 decades for women and men.3 With the trend of more women entering urology, the gender gap will continue to narrow and, consequently, more women may rise to positions of leadership. However, the underlying reason for the disproportionate underrepresentation of women in leadership may not be solely owing to the lag in female recruitment and, therefore, the data we have gathered are important in making future longitudinal comparisons and tracking trends.

In our study, women were more likely to have roles of leadership in the educational than in the academic arena, which was also seen in OB-GYN.6 It is uncertain if women gravitate more toward educational roles or if there is a tendency to place them on certain “tracks.” It has been suggested that chairs often ascend from division directors and vice chair, which are more frequently held by men. Characterization of current urology chairman also suggested that research productivity may play a larger role in urology chair appointments compared with other fields.9 Future description of research productivity based on gender may be helpful in elucidating potential factors that promote advancement to this prestigious position. Lastly, we acknowledge the inherent difficulty in balancing both career and family life for all female professionals, and perhaps administrative roles are perceived to have more burdensome time commitments. There is also the common notion that women prefer part time or flexible work hours; however, this appears to be unfounded for women practicing urology. There are reports showing no difference in the number of hours worked comparing male and female urologists with the majority of female urologists working full time and on average more than 50 hours per week.10,11

The main limitation to our study is the querying of data from departmental websites. As expected, there was variability in the quantity of information as well as how current the information was. We attempted to obtain missing information and clarify any ambiguity through communication with the programs primarily through email and phone calls with the residency program coordinator. There was unfortunately no means to ensure that websites were updated or accurate. We did gather data in less than 12 weeks in an attempt to limit catching departmental turnover. Furthermore, several division directors had more than 1 area of interest. In such situations, we looked at their curriculum vitae to categorize their area of expertise and background training. We also did not attempt to categorize programs as academic vs community-based urology residency programs as most urology programs have a substantial academic component.

To date, these are the first data set to characterize gender and subspecialty for positions of academic and educational leadership in urology. Gathering such data is important in acknowledging the current climate in academic urology and tracking longitudinal trends in gender and subspecialty representation. Future potential areas to look at include characterizing gender in relation to all urologic subspecialty fellowship directors, compensation, and research productivity.

Conclusion
Overall, women in urology are grossly underrepresented when it comes to educational and administrative positions of leadership. There is also a wide yet narrowing gender gap as more women are pursuing careers in this field. Given this upward trend, we may see more women in positions of leadership over time. However, the underrepresentation of women in leadership is complex and likely not solely owing to the lagging percentage of women in urology. Continued efforts should be made to decrease the gender gap in urology and promote the advancement of women to positions of leadership.