Health care is changing rapidly, so we must change with the times to develop more efficient, practical, cost-effective, and, importantly, high-quality methods to care for patients. We teach medical students that optimal patient care requires face-to-face interaction to collect information on the patient’s history and perform the physical examination. However, management of many patients—especially those with chronic diseases—does not always require physical examination. Telemedicine offers an opportunity to take advantage of technology while leveraging the progressive push toward efficiency and value but also requires the belief that excellent patient care is not always provided in person. Telemedicine can include a variety of aspects of patient care adapted to be performed remotely, such as telemonitoring, tele-education, teleconsultation, and telecare. All of these have been evaluated in gastroenterology practice and have demonstrated feasibility and patient preference but have produced mixed results regarding patient outcomes. By combining telemedicine tools and new care models, we can redesign chronic disease management to include fewer in-person visits when patients are well yet increase access for patients who need to be seen. This change could lead to higher-value care by improving the experience of care, decreasing costs, and improving the health of the population. Barriers include reimbursement, licensing, and fear of litigation. However, if we hope to meet the needs of patients within our changing health care system, telemedicine should be incorporated into our strategy.

Previous article in issueNext article in issue
Keywords
TelehealthGastroenterologyValue
Abbreviations used in this paper
ECHOExtension for Community Healthcare OutcomesHATHome Automated TelemanagementHCVhepatitis C virusIBDinflammatory bowel diseaseMACRAMedicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015UNMUniversity of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
Health care reform brings new challenges but also opportunities to address the changing times. The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) has arrived, with an aim to increase the value of health care by addressing the quality and cost of the care that is delivered.1 Gastroenterologists will need to take a number of approaches to contend with MACRA. One approach that can simultaneously address multiple components of MACRA is the use of telemedicine. Telemedicine provides the opportunity to keep up with modern health care reimbursement needs while focusing on the patient.

The term telemedicine is not very specific. The World Health Organization defined telemedicine in 1997 as
the delivery of health care services, where distance is a critical factor, by all health care professionals using information communication technologies for the exchange of valid information for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of diseases and injuries, research and evaluation, and for the continuing education of health care providers, all in the interest of advancing the health of individuals and their communities.2


It can more simply be defined as the application of information and communication technologies for providing health care services at a distance without the need for direct contact with the patient,3 with direct contact meaning “hands on the patient.” It is important to distinguish among the subtypes of telemedicine, which include telemonitoring, tele-education, teleconsultation, and telecare.

Telemonitoring refers to following patients with wearable or mobile devices or having patients report via the Internet or telephone to their providers so that their symptoms or disease progression can be closely tracked. A component of telemonitoring is the framework of digital health or mobile health, which includes smartphone applications, devices, portals, and social media. Although telemonitoring is a large part of the future of electronic health care, a full description of the work is not provided here; for extensive reviews, see Spiegel4 and Riaz and Atreja.5

Tele-education has been provided for years and includes webinars and interactive sessions for providers alone or with their patients. Teleconsultation is also not new; it refers to remote intensive care unit care, emergency department consultation, or collaboration between providers and experts who are out of geographic reach. However, telecare is the form of telemedicine that can transform the very basic tenet of what physicians learn early in medical school (the foundation of patient care): the physical examination and physician-patient interaction. Telecare uses some method of video interaction to simulate the face-to-face office visit. William Osler taught us “listen to your patient, he is telling you the diagnosis.”6 Osler certainly was not envisioning the patient holding a smartphone using an app, but does this still hold true?

Telemedicine is already used broadly in medicine. When telemedicine was evaluated in 2012, nearly one-half of US hospitals were found to have active programs.7 This push for expansion is partly to keep up with the times, but telemedicine is also uniquely positioned to address increasing health care costs, the focus on patient-centered care,8 health care delivery as a service,9 and growing problems with access to the right providers at the right time.

Telemedicine Beyond Gastroenterology
Different forms of telemedicine have been used widely in other fields of medicine. The most well developed is the use of teleconsultation in intensive care medicine and emergency medicine. These are good examples of ways in which technology can facilitate rapid access when expertise is too far away. This has already been shown to be feasible, efficient, and effective by offering expert care from afar while avoiding the risk and cost of transporting an unstable patient.10,11 Some of the most promising findings come from the field of neurology, where teleconsultation is used frequently in management of patients with stroke.12 When time is of the essence and expertise is often unavailable, outside of more populated regions and referral centers, neurologists can provide acute stroke intervention from a distance.

Telemonitoring has been extensively studied in chronic disease management in endocrinology,13 rheumatology,14 nephrology,15 cardiology,16 and other areas, where longitudinal disease metrics are important. Use of wearable devices and web portals provides alternatives to the reliance on patients to bring in pages of homemade spreadsheets with important but uninterpretable data. Although telemedicine is not a part of most practices, publications on telemedicine are found in almost all fields of medicine. A 2015 Cochrane Review of 93 trials concluded that telemedicine can be effective for management of chronic diseases, but its success depends on patient populations, disease severity, and cost of health care services provided.17

Telemedicine in Gastroenterology
Telemedicine has been studied and used clinically among a number of fields in gastroenterology. This work spans telemonitoring, tele-education, teleconsultation, and telecare (Table 1). Most interest has been in management of patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and monitoring and care of patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

Table 1. Telemedicine in Gastroenterology

Telemedicine modality	Examples in gastroenterology subspecialties
Telemonitoring: following patients with wearable or mobile devices or reporting via the Internet or telephone to their providers	Gastrointestinal motility4
IBD25–28,31–33
Tele-education: webinars and interactive sessions with providers alone or providers with patients	Hepatology18
IBD35
Teleconsultation: remote care, allowing providers to work with experts who are out of geographic reach	Hepatology18,20,21
IBD34,35
Telecare: uses some method of video interaction to simulate the face-to-face office visit	IBD40,41
Hepatology

The Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes (ECHO) model has been the most successful telemedicine program in gastroenterology. ECHO was developed by Sanjeev Arora and colleagues at the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center (UNM) to improve access for underserved populations to best practice care for the treatment of HCV infection.18 They first published findings from their research approximately 10 years ago.19 The ECHO platform is a tele-education and teleconsultation program in which specialists at UNM offer training, advice, and support to primary care providers, including physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants. The specialists are from fields including hepatology, infectious disease, psychiatry, and pharmacology. In 2011, the ECHO team published findings in The New England Journal of Medicine from a prospective study that analyzed treatment for HCV at UNM versus by primary care clinicians at 21 ECHO sites in rural areas and prisons in New Mexico.18 The investigators focused on outcomes, and the primary end point was a sustained virologic response 24 weeks after treatment. Their analysis of more than 400 patients with HCV infection found that similar proportions of patients achieved a sustained virologic response after treatment at the ECHO sites (58.2%) versus the UNM sites (57.5%). This successful study led to expansion of the ECHO program to more than 200 sites and to use of this model of HCV management by other groups.20,21 The message from the ECHO study was that telemedicine, in the forms of teleconsultation and tele-education, can provide specialty care in difficult-to-access regions by teaching and assisting primary care providers in managing subspecialty chronic diseases.

Bowel Preparation

Tele-education about bowel preparation, in the form of telephone calls to patients undergoing colonoscopy, has been shown to be successful. In a controlled trial in China, investigators showed that patients randomly assigned to a group that received an educational telephone call emphasizing the importance of the preparation, proper use of bowel-preparation agents, and expected side effects, as well as a review of dietary restrictions, had significantly higher rates of adequate bowel preparation and polyp detection.22 A comment on this study noted that although findings from the single-center study in China might not be applicable worldwide, they provide important evidence for the concept that low-cost, simple interventions can increase quality, efficiency, and value of health care.23

IBD

There has been a significant amount of research on telemedicine in patients with IBD. Ray Cross in Maryland is a pioneer in this field and has studied a telemonitoring program for patients with Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Working with a system called Home Automated Telemanagement (HAT), Cross found nearly 10 years ago that this system was feasible and accepted by patients.24 The original HAT system home unit consisted of a network computer and electronic weight scale that automatically transmitted patient survey results and weight to a central server. The management system was set up to generate alerts and reminders for patients and provided a customized action plan. A nurse coordinator monitored the information, and physicians were consulted when needed. More recently, HAT was tested in a randomized controlled trial of patients with ulcerative colitis.25 Although this trial did not find HAT to reduce disease activity, overall quality of life, or adherence to therapy, it did improve disease-specific quality of life. The work of this group has evolved into a program called TELE-IBD, which uses text messaging via mobile phones to provide patients with information and gather data from patients.26

A group in Denmark has also studied the effects of telemedicine programs on patients with IBD. The constant care approach collects data on disease activity from patients, which generates a traffic light disease status of green, yellow, or red, with close provider follow-up when patients have a relapse in symptoms.27 This program was studied in a randomized controlled trial of patients with ulcerative colitis receiving treatment with aminosalicylates.27 The results showed strong patient preference for the constant care program, with increased adherence to therapy, improved quality of life, decreased duration of relapse and number of outpatient visits, and an associated decrease in overall cost. In a follow-up study, the same group used constant care to individualize dosing schedules for infliximab (ranging from 4 to 12 weeks between infusions) based on a scoring system that quantified patients’ symptoms and inflammatory burden, measured by fecal level of calprotectin. Patients used an easy sampler kit to collect and send fecal samples from their home to a central laboratory, which measured the calprotectin levels.28 These patients, who were receiving infliximab maintenance therapy, remained stable over the year of this study; only 10% of infusions were given at the standard 8-week interval, whereas 39% were administered with a shorter interval and 50% with a longer interval. With other fecal calprotectin home monitoring devices, patients use smartphones to photograph and submit results of their stool assays. This approach provides additional telemonitoring opportunities for patients, providers, and researchers.29,30

Other groups are developing telemonitoring strategies focused on patient-reported outcomes. Project Sonar, a partnership between the Illinois Gastroenterology Group and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois, has reduced cost of care by decreasing emergency department use and hospitalizations. Patients report symptoms via a web-based platform, leading to risk assessment and an algorithm for care management based on risk.31 The Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America IBD Qorus program centers on the concept of patient and provider coproduction of care. Patients report their own process and outcome quality measures using a web portal, and they are tracked and use a learning health system to collaboratively improve care. This system is used in multiple gastroenterology practices across the United States.32 The HealthPROMISE platform provides a decision support and patient-reported outcomes tool that empowers patients to engage with providers to have a larger part in their medical decision making.33

Teleconsultation has been used for patients with IBD in the Veterans Affairs health care system. Investigators studied the feasibility of having trainees remotely consult with attending-level gastroenterologists to manage outpatients with IBD.34 Fellows interviewed and examined patients and then presented their findings to expert clinicians via a video interface. After discussion, a management plan was reviewed simultaneously by the patient, consultant, and fellow via video conference. Patients reported a high level of satisfaction with these appointments, similar to in-person clinical encounters.

The IBD live interinstitutional and interdisciplinary videoconference education (IBD LIVE) series began locally in Pittsburgh in 2009 and since has grown to include more than 10 sites throughout the United States.35 This tele-education program uses a multisite virtual conferencing platform to bring sites together weekly. The conference is case based, and centers take turns presenting complex IBD cases to a national audience of pediatric and adult IBD experts, colorectal surgeons, psychiatrists, radiologists, pathologists, and others. The most educational of the case presentations are ultimately published in the IBD Journal as part of the IBD LIVE case series.36–39

Telemedicine (telecare) has been used for adolescent patients with IBD. In an effort to improve adherence to therapy, Hommel et al initiated a behavior intervention program consisting of 4 weekly sessions, each lasting 60 to 90 minutes.40 The video sessions were conducted via Skype between patients and providers and psychologists. Although this program produced a slight decrease in adherence to thiopurine therapy, it led to a meaningful increase in adherence to mesalamine therapy. The investigators reported cost savings related to travel mileage and time.

The Dartmouth-Hitchcock IBD Center has been investigating how telecare can increase value for patients and the health care system. Patients use a secure application to sign in to a virtual waiting room for scheduled appointments. They can use any device with a camera (smartphone, tablet, or computer) for the appointment. The provider is in his or her office, and during the visit the patient and provider can see each other and review data from the electronic health record, or any other document that the provider would like to share, including imaging and endoscopy results. Patients are asked to complete previsit and postvisit questionnaires that collect patient-reported quality metrics and feedback from the visit. Results were evaluated for the first 100 patients that participated in the program.41 More than 90% of participants agreed that the telemedicine visits were equally as effective as in-office visits in allowing physicians to understand their current disease status; 85% of participants believed the care they received was as good as if they had gone into their physician’s office. Because many patients lived or worked far from the medical center, 80% of those involved in the telemedicine clinic saved either a half-day or a full day of time by not driving to an in-office visit. This was an encouraging start to the program, but further studies are needed to determine the effects on quality of care and cost to the health care system (and individual patient).

Transforming Practice Management
The latest telemedicine tools provide opportunities for improving care of patients with chronic diseases. It is time to critically evaluate the classic model of routine, scheduled, in-office follow-up visits. Typically, office clinic schedules are filled with routine follow-up evaluations of patients who are well and may have been stable for years. In turn, new patients often have to wait months for initial evaluations, and acutely ill patients seek care from emergency departments instead of providers who know them well.

A new model of care has been introduced in Sweden.42 Rheumatologists recognized the incongruence between scheduled visits and timing of rheumatoid arthritis flares—approximately one-third of scheduled visits did not result in any change to therapy. Therefore, investigators at the Karolinska Institute studied how patient-initiated office visits would affect care. They randomly assigned 131 patients to groups that received either routine care or had patient-initiated appointments over an 18-month period. At the end of the study, disease activity did not differ between groups, yet patients who initiated their own appointments had a higher level of satisfaction. The researchers concluded that a patient-initiated system of care could be safely introduced. In an analysis of a similar program, in Bristol, England, Hewlett et al found that patients with direct access to the clinic through patient-initiated visits had 38% fewer hospitalizations and higher levels of confidence and satisfaction with the system compared with patients with traditional office visits.43

Combining the model of patient-initiated visits and telemedicine provides a powerful opportunity to change the paradigm of how outpatient care of chronic disease is delivered. The tools are in place to transition routine, scheduled follow-up for stable patients to a telemedicine visit, saving time and money for patients and the system without compromising quality of care. Quick and efficient telemedicine visits can increase the number of in-office appointments available for patients who are sick and would otherwise go to the emergency department as well as greatly expedite first visits for new patients. A successful telemedicine program provides the opportunity to change a system that is frustrating for patients and providers into a more satisfying experience with high-quality care. The triple aim of improving experience of care, decreasing costs, and improving the health of the population can all be met.44

Barriers and Challenges
There are many challenges to providing telemedicine; before it can become part of mainstream practice, significant barriers need to be addressed. Although telemedicine has been successful in research settings, we do not really know how it will translate to routine practice or affect patient outcomes and cost. We are not even sure what metrics would help us understand if different forms of telemedicine are good for patients. The studies we discussed used disease activity, cost, and patient satisfaction as primary outcomes. However, it is not clear that these are the outcomes that will convince us that telemedicine will help change clinical care. Value, a formula of quality and cost, may be the driving force. We can make an argument that as long as we either increase or maintain quality of care, and costs are lower, then overall value will be higher. Therefore, instead of trials designed to show superiority of a telemedicine intervention versus control, a noninferiority trial that assures maintenance of quality with lowering of costs would show enhanced value.

Reimbursement and liability issues are real. Few payers reimburse patients for telemedicine visits; they are significantly behind the times in understanding their value for patients and reduced overall cost. Licensing is also a problem, because providers are supposed to be licensed in the state where the patient lives, as opposed to where they are practicing. This limits the usefulness of telemedicine and excludes patients who might benefit most, particularly patients in rural areas who need to drive many miles to see their providers or do not have access to subspecialists at all. To lower barriers, the American Telemedicine Association has created a State Policy Resource Center,45 and the Federation of State Medical Boards has proposed an Interstate Medical Licensure Compact; these would allow physicians seeking practice in multiple states an expedited licensure process to facilitate the use of telemedicine.46,47

Patient access to the Internet and comprehension of portal engagement are required for successful telemedicine programs,48 which opens the possibility of widening health care disparities for at-risk populations.49 Local sites where patients can access tertiary care telemedicine programs have therefore been created, yet training and support for vulnerable patients with low levels of health literacy are needed.50 In addition, the Federal Communications Commission has created the Lifeline program, which provides deeply discounted mobile phone service to low-income Americans.51

The greatest barrier for telemedicine may be the providers themselves. We have all been trained in and have practiced the standard model of face-to-face care, which brought many of us into medicine in the first place. We need to learn how to use telemedicine tools in ways that will not reduce communication, rapport, or trust with patients. Furthermore, telemedicine will need to save time, not increase it, so providers will require training on how to make telemedicine an effective and efficient part of their practices. As stated by Jeremy Kahn, “disruptive technologies are just that—disruptive. No one can say for certain where they may take us.”52 There may be unintended consequences related to the implementation of telemedicine, but if we are aware of this potential, we can focus on minimizing negative effects.