
Copyright © Royal College of pathologists of Australasia. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Background: Ectopic pregnancy is a major health problem
among women of reproductive age and is a major gynaecological
emergency that requires prompt diagnosis and treatment. It has
been estimated that less than half of the affected women will
conceive again, only a third can achieve a live birth and a risk of
repeat ectopic pregnancy is 1 in 20 in subsequent pregnancies. On
the global scene, a rising incidence has been observed in the last
two decades and this has been attributed to an increase in the
incidence of sexually transmitted diseases and the use of contraceptives.
Aim: To determine the prevalence, mode of presentation and
forms of ectopic pregnancy.
Method: This is a four year retrospective study of ectopic pregnancy
cases managed in the hospital between 1 January 2009 and
31 December 2012.
Results: A total of 44 ectopic pregnancy cases were received
during the four year period. The total gynaecological and pregnancy-related
specimens were 1082 and 410, respectively. Ectopic
pregnancy accounted for 4.1% of all the gynaecological and 10.7%
of pregnancy-related specimens received in the laboratory. Age
range was 16–40 years with a peak age distribution in the 3rd
decade (61.4%). The most common site of involvement was the left
fallopian tube (34.1%), an infrequent site was the ovary (4.6%)
while in (31.8%) site was not specified. There was rupture in 56.8%
of the cases while 43.2% were unruptured. The triad of amenorrhoea,
abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding was the most common
mode of presentation (52.3%).
Conclusion: Ectopic pregnancy is still a major health problem
among women of reproductive age group. The rate of tubal
rupture associated with ectopic pregnancy can be reduced
through creation of better awareness of this condition in this
environment, as this will ensure early presentation and prompt
intervention.
Gynecologic Pathology: Poster#148
EXPRESSION OF PROTEIN REGENERATING LIVER-3
(PRL-3) AND VEGF IN OVARIAN EPITHELIAL CANCER
AND METASTATIC SITE
Upik Anderiani Miskad1
, Sharvianty Arifuddin2
, Syahrul
Rauf2 and Syarifuddin Wahid1
1Department of Pathology, and 2Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University,
Makassar, Indonesia
Background: PRL-3 (phosphatase of regenerating liver-3) and
VEGF have been reported to play a role in the growth and
metastasize of some cancers, including ovarian cancer.
Aims: To investigate the expression of PRL-3 and VEGF in
ovarian epithelial cancer, metastatic tumor and correlate with
the clinicopathologic parameters.
Methods: Expressions of PRL-3 and VEGF in 40 ovarian epithelial
cancer specimens and 25 omentum metastasis site were
detected by immunohistochemistry. RT-PCR was also performed
to detect PRL-3 mRNA from ascites.
Results: PRL-3 mRNA expression was clearly detected in the
ascites of ovarian cancer patient positive metastasis compare with
ovarian cancer without metastasis. Among ovarian epithelial cancer,
there were 7 (17.5%) endometrioid, 11 (27.5%) mucinous and
22 (55%) samples of serous tumor. The expression of PRL-3 and
VEGF was significantly higher in the primary ovarian epithelial
cancer with omentum metastasis than primary tumor without
metastasis ( p ¼ 0.031, p ¼ 0.036). There was no significant correlation
between PRL-3, VEGF expression and histological type,
histological grade, and stadium.
Conclusions: These results strongly suggest that PRL-3 and
VEGF may play a significant role in invasion and metastasis of
ovarian epithelial cancer. PRL-3 might be a novel molecular
marker for aggressive ovarian cancer and act as a poor prognostic
factor.
Gynecologic Pathology: Poster#149
GESTATIONAL NON-TROPHOBLASTIC CANCERS
Daksha Prabhat, Pradeep Vaideeswar, Rushabh Shah, Pragati
Sathe, Lalita Patel and Naina Goel
Department of Pathology, Seth GS Medical College, Mumbai,
India
Non-trophoblastic cancers complicating pregnancy are rare with an
incidence of approximately 1 in 1000 pregnancies, common sites
being female genital tract and breast. We report a series of seven
pregnancy associated cancers in a six year period (2009–2014).
The patients ranged in age from 22–38 years (mean age 27.7 years).
An antemortem diagnosis was made in four patients, the gestational
age ranging from 12 weeks to 28 weeks. They presented with
mass lesions and site associated symptoms. These included dysgerminoma
of the left ovary, serous papillary tumour of borderline
malignancy involving the right ovary, angiosarcoma of the left
breast and left frontal anaplastic oligodendroglioma. Surgical
excision was performed in all four cases with two postoperative
deaths. The remaining three cancers were encountered at autopsy,
the gestational age ranging from 31–37 weeks. These patients
presented with acute febrile illness, dysphagia with multiple
subcutaneous nodules and generalized weakness which were
due to pulmonary giant cell carcinoma, esophageal adenosquamous
carcinoma and hematologic malignancy, respectively.
Cancers associated with pregnancy tend to have aggressive course
with poor prognosis.
Gynecologic Pathology: Poster#150
HEMANGIOMA OF THE OVARY: A
CLINICOPATHOLOGIC, IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL AND
CYTOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF 10 CASES
John K. Schoolmeester1
, Andrew L. Folpe1
, Patricia T.
Greipp1
, Gary L. Keeney1 and Robert A. Soslow2
1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, and 2Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States
Background: The morphologic features and natural history of
ovarian hemangioma are not fully elucidated. A novel EWSR1-
NFATC1 fusion was recently reported in a hemangioma of bone.1
We characterized the clinicopathologic and cytogenetic features of
the largest series of ovarian hemangiomas to date.
Methods: Ten cases coded as hemangioma involving the ovary
were studied. Clinical history was obtained for every case. Seven
cases were immunohistochemically stained. FISH was performed
on seven cases utilizing a laboratory developed break apart probe
for EWSR1.