place at the hospital, in the presence of family members and staff. The
medical doctors who were invited to the wedding had chosen not to
participate with the main purpose of keeping the emotional distance
that would allow them to make a more rational decision. After the
wedding some of the doctors would consider their presence at the
ceremony from a different perspective.
Conclusion: This case reflects the need of having well prepared and
orientated teams, to approach the patient as a whole in her/his final
life stage, not only to provide the pharmacological symptomatic relief,
but also the emotional comfort, so many times considered as secondary.
PO117
CAN WE MAKE A PORTRAIT OF WOMEN WITH INOPERABLE LOCALLY
ADVANCED BREAST CANCER? THE EXPERIENCE OF THE BREAST UNIT
OF SOUTHERN SWITZERLAND (CSSI)
Giacomo Montagna1,2, Gabriella Bianchi-Micheli2, Lorenzo Rossi2,3,
Marzia Conti-Beltraminelli2,3, Roberta Decio2, Vilma Ratti3,
Thomas Gyr1,2, Olivia Pagani2,3, Francesco Meani1,2
1
Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale, Department of Obstetrics and Gyneacology,
Lugano, Switzerland; 2
Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale, Breast Unit of Southern
Switzerland (CSSI), Lugano, Switzerland; 3
Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale,
Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland (IOSI), Bellinzona, Switzerland
Introduction: Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer in
women. Early detection and treatment improvements have both led to a
significant decrease in mortality over the last 25 years. Locally advanced
BC (LABC) is defined as large operable primary BC (stage IIB, IIIA) and/or
inoperable BC (i.e. involving the skin/chest wall and/or with extensive
nodal involvement) (stage IIIB, IIIC). Despite the amount of information
available through the media and advocacy groups (i.e. Europa Donna),
repeated events to raise public awareness (i.e. the Pink Ribbon
Campaign) and mammography screening programs, LABC still accounts
for 5-10% of all new primary BC diagnoses. Overall, the prognosis of
patients with LABC is relatively poor with a 5-year overall survival <50%.
Materials and Methods: Between 2008-2014, >1300 patients with a
newly diagnosed primary BC have been treated at CSSI. 114 patients (9%)
had LABC at diagnosis. We planned to retrospectively investigate the
demographic (i.e. age, social and marital status, education level, religious
beliefs) and psychosocial characteristics (i.e. BC family history, somatic
and psychiatric co-morbidities, use of psychiatric therapy, concomitant
chronic diseases, timing of symptom detection and initial symptom
interpretation, emotional reactions, family and social interactions) of
these patients. A demographic survey and a semi-structured interview
(28 items) was specifically developed and submitted by the treating
team (gynecologist, psychologist, medical oncologist) to all consenting
patients.
Aims of the study: With this study we intend to assess the demographic
and psychosocial features of women with LABC treated at our institution
over the past 6 years and possibly identify factors which led them to
delay seeking medical attention. Data are under collection and will be
analyzed and ready to be presented by the end of October 2015. We aim
at drawing a patient’s profile that could be potentially used to better
identify those women who are at higher risk for developing LABC in
our geographic area in order to build specific and targeted information
and awareness tools. On the long term, we want to evaluate the impact
of the mammographic screening program, recently introduced in our
canton, on the incidence of LABC.
PR118
COMPARISON OF INTEGRATIVE CARE EXPECTATIONS BETWEEN
BREAST CANCER PATIENTS AND BREAST ONCOLOGY PHYSICIANS IN
AN ETHNICALLY DIVERSE POPULATION
Damien Hansra3,4, Jeremy Ramdial1
, David Ruiz2,3, Ashwin Mehta4,
Eugene Ahn4, Jorge Antunez de Mayolo3
1
Jackson Memorial Hospital, Oncology, Miami, USA; 2
Mast Academy,
Oncology Clinical Research, Miami, USA; 3
Mercy Hospital/Oncology and
Radiation Associates, Hematology & Oncology, Miami, USA; 4
Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Miami, Oncology,
Miami, USA
Purpose: Evidence shows increased patient utilization of various
integrative care modalities to manage symptoms and improve quality
of life. Measurements of breast cancer patients and physicians’ opinions
regarding the importance of integrative care are lacking. We aim to
compare how integrative care modalities are values between physicians
and patients.
Methods: University of Miami IRB obtained. Adult breast cancer
patients (pts) and physicians who specialize in breast cancer (MDs) at an
academic tertiary care medical center in Miami, Florida were enrolled to
complete a survey. Inclusion criteria: adult cancer pts and treating hem/
onc MDs. Exclusion criteria: Pts without breast cancer and non-breast
cancer specialist MDs. Demographics include: age, gender, race, and
ethnicity. Clinical info included cancer subtype and MD name. Survey
had 7 questions assessing opinions on “comprehensive care”, asking
“In addition to standard care, it’s important to incorporate/provide”
nutrition services, exercise therapy, spiritual/religious counseling,
supplement/herbal advice, support groups, music therapy, or other
complimentary medicine services (acupuncture, massage, relaxation
therapy). Data recorded on a 5 point Likert scale (1 = highly disagree,
2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, 5 = highly agree) and made into 2
categories (1, 2, 3 = neutral/disagree vs. 4, 5 = agree). Fisher’s exact test
with 2 sided p-value used to compare responses between MDs and pts.
Results: 909 pts and 55 MDs enrolled from 06/2013-01/2015 with 144
pts and 11 MDs meeting criteria. Mean pts age = 50 with range 26-88 with
2% male and 98% female. 65% of pts were Hispanic vs. 35% non-Hispanic.
78% were white, 6% black, 0% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 16% other. 71%
of pts agree spiritual/religious counseling is important to incorporate
into cancer care compared to 25% of MDs, p=0.01. Disparities were also
seen for supplement/herbal therapies (90% vs. 36% resp., p=0.001),
music therapy (63% vs. 11% resp., p=0.003), and “other complementary
services” (84% vs. 44% resp., p=0.01). No differences were found for
nutritional advice (88% pts vs. 82% MDs, p=0.63), exercise therapy (90%
vs. 82% resp., p=0.31), and support groups (75% vs. 75% resp., p=1.00).
Conclusion: The majority of adult breast cancer pts seen at a major
academic institution feel that it is important to incorporate nutrition
advice, exercise therapy, spiritual/religious counseling, supplement/
herbal advice, support groups, music therapy, and other complimentary
services as part of their treatment plan. With the exception of support
groups, exercise therapies, and nutritional advice, MDs tend to value
integrative modalities significantly less than pts. Increased availability
and utilization of integrative modalities could improve pts quality of
life, and other clinical endpoints.
PR119
SENSITIZING PRIMARY HEALTHCARE WORKERS TOWARDS
PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES OF BREAST-CANCER PATIENTS
S. Pramod
Health Alert Organisation of India, Health Dpt., Garud colony, Deopur,
Dhule, India
Introduction: Primary healthcare workers are backbone of rural/tribal
areas healthcare-sector must be trained for psycho-social needs of
young breast-cancer patients. 