VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017 701
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Digital cross-mounting: A new opportunity in
prosthetic dentistry
Pietro Venezia, DDS1/Ferruccio Torsello, DDS, PhD2/Salvatore D’Amato, MD, DDS3/Raffaele Cavalcanti, DDS, PhD1
The prosthodontic management of complex rehabilitations
requires several stages of treatment including one or more
provisional restorations. The design and adjustments of the
provisional are made to achieve an optimal functional and
esthetic outcome for the patient. However, the adjustments
needed are both time and cost consuming. Therefore, once a
satisfactory provisional is made, the information should not be
lost during the following stages of treatment. The purpose of
this clinical case is to illustrate “digital cross-mounting,” a procedure
used to precisely transfer information from the provisional
to the final fixed rehabilitation in a digital workflow.
(Quintessence Int 2017;48: 701–709; doi: 10.3290/j.qi.a38863)
Key words: cross-mounting, digital workflow, full-arch rehabilitation, intraoral scanner, monolithic zirconia
PROSTHODONTICS
Pietro Venezia
craniomandibular relationship with the determination
of centric relation position with an adequate vertical
dimension, the orientation of the occlusal plane three
dimensionally, the occlusal relationship, the perioral
tissue support, the tooth display, and the phonetics.2-9
In the daily routine, the clinician records the aforementioned
functional and esthetic parameters. With
the diagnostic information, the dental technician fabricates
the wax-up and the provisional restoration. The
casts should be mounted on the articulator in centric
relation at the correct vertical dimension with the aid of
a facebow registration. Once the provisional restoration
is produced, it is used not only to provide the patient
with interim prosthesis, but also to test the function
and esthetic changes, as this restoration could be modified
for improvement several times in a relatively easy
manner.
After a proper period of time with a functional and
esthetic provisional restoration, the definitive prosthesis
can be fabricated. The final prosthesis should be
identical to the provisional, but with a more durable
The rehabilitation of one or two completely edentulous
arches is complex and requires an interdisciplinary
team approach combining the proficiency of the prosthodontist,
the periodontist, the oral surgeon, and the
dental technician. The concept of prosthetically guided
rehabilitation is universally recognized: the position of
the prosthesis should be the guide for the periodontal
and implant surgery.1
When planning the rehabilitation for a full-arch restoration,
several parameters should be taken into consideration
in order to achieve a functional prosthesis
with an esthetically pleasant result. These include the
1 Private Practice, Bari, Italy.
2 Research Fellow, Department of Periodontics and Prosthodontics, Eastman
Dental Hospital, Rome, Italy.
3 Aggregate Professor, Multidisciplinary Department of Medicine and Dentistry,
Unit of Maxillo-Facial Surgery, University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples,
Italy.
Correspondence: Dr Pietro Venezia, Studio di Odontoiatria Specialistica
“Cavalcanti & Venezia”, Via G. Posca, 15 Bari (BA), 70124, Italy. Email:
pierovenezia@gmail.com
702 VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
material. The transition from the temporary to the
definitive prosthesis is complex, as it is difficult to reproduce
exactly the details of the provisional restoration.
Some techniques have been proposed to transfer
all the prosthetic information (vertical dimension, centric
relation, frontal and lateral guidance, esthetics) in
cases treated with a fixed provisional prosthesis supported
either by teeth or by implants.10,11 Another technique
has been proposed for cases in which the provisional
and diagnostic phase is performed with a
removable denture.12
The aim of this article, illustrated through a clinical
case, is to integrate a fully digital workflow to accurately
transfer diagnostic information from the provisional
stage to the definitive fixed prosthesis for a fullarch
implant-supported rehabilitation.
CASE REPORT
The patient, a 51-year-old woman, presented with
severe attachment loss, multiple sites with acute infection,
and mobility in the maxillary arch (Figs 1 and 2).
The periodontal chart was completed and a set of periapical
radiographs was performed in order to determine
the prognosis of the teeth in the maxilla and in
the mandible. Preliminary impressions were taken with
irreversible hydrocolloid (Blueprint Xcreme, Dentsply
DeTrey). The diagnostic casts were articulated on a
semi-adjustable articulator with the aid of a facebow
registration and centric relation wax index. Facial and
dentolabial analyses were carried out as well as phonetic
tests. After this careful examination it was decided
that all the remaining teeth in the maxillary arch should
be extracted. Several treatment options were reviewed
with the patient, and a full-arch implant-supported
fixed restoration was selected as the most appropriate
for the patient’s needs and expectations. With regards
to the timing of extractions and implants, immediate
placement was excluded because of the presence of
acute infections. As the patient desired avoidance of
any removable appliance in the provisional phase, a
“staged approach” was followed, temporarily maintaining
a few teeth in order to support a provisional fixed
restoration.13
a b
c
Figs 1a to 1c Initial intraoral photographs. Fig 2 Initial radiographic status.
VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017 703
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
A prescription with precise indications regarding
the vertical dimension, the position of the new incisal
edge, and the desired occlusal scheme was sent to the
dental laboratory technician, who produced a wax-up
of the prosthetic project.
It was decided to maintain three teeth in strategic
positions (the maxillary right and left canines and left
second premolar) as abutments for a fixed provisional
restoration of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) with a
metal reinforcement that was manufactured by the
technician with an analogic workflow before tooth
extractions. The maxillary right and left canines and left
second premolar were endodontically treated.
In one single clinical session, all teeth with the
exception of the maxillary right and left canines and left
second premolar were extracted and socket preservation
procedures were performed with a mix of inorganic
bovine bone and porcine collagen (Bio-Oss Collagen,
Geistlich Pharma). In the same session, the natural
abutments in the positions of the maxillary right and
left canines and left second premolar were prepared
and the provisional restoration was relined, refined,
and cemented. The patient was checked 10 days later
for suture removal and for a control of her oral situation
(Fig 3). Thereafter, the healing of soft and hard tissues
was controlled every 6 weeks.
Seven months after tooth extractions, six implants
were placed with the aid of a surgical template: two
Bone Level Tapered implants (Straumann) in the maxillary
lateral incisor positions (diameter 3.3 mm) and
four Soft Tissue Level implants (Straumann) in the
maxillary first premolar positions (diameter 3.3 mm)
and in the maxillary first molar positions (diameter
4.1 mm). All the implants presented with a sandblasted,
acid-etched, chemically activated surface
(SLActive, Straumann).
The use of a metal-reinforced provisional on natural
abutments allowed undisturbed healing of the
implants and provided the patient with a fixed restoration
for the whole duration of the treatment.
After an osseointegration period of 8 weeks, the
implants were visually inspected and hand-checked
and were considered ready to support the loading.14-16
From this moment a totally digital workflow was used.
a b
c
Figs 3a to 3c Anterior photographs taken immediately after
tooth extractions and socket preservation procedures, at the
moment of delivery of the first provisional restoration and after
the healing period.
704 VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
The temporary prosthesis and the healing abutment
were removed, the Scan Bodies provided by the manufacturer
for intraoral scan (Scan Body, Straumann) were
secured to the implants, and the digital implant impression
of the maxillary arch was taken (Fig 4). This acquisition
provided the information regarding the position
and the morphology of implants and remaining teeth,
as well as periodontal and peri-implant tissues. The
digital impression was widely extended towards the
palate to record the rugae palatine and the incisal
papilla and towards the vestibule to include not only
the teeth but also the surrounding structures (Fig 5).17
The scanner used for this clinical case (True Definition
Scan, 3M Espe) operates with contrast patterning powder
to increase the speed of the impression, to facilitate
the data acquisition, and to improve its accuracy.
The digital impression of the mandibular arch was
then acquired in a second scan (Fig 5).
The scan bodies in the maxillary arch were removed,
the provisional prosthesis repositioned, and a third
acquisition was performed on the vestibular side with
the provisional prosthesis in situ with maxillary and
mandibular arches in contact. This acquisition allowed
for the bite registration between the maxillary and mandibular
scans: in the bite registration function, the software
was designed to take into consideration only the
landmarks needed for this purpose. The care taken in
the previous scans to extend the acquisition to the soft
tissues allowed recording of enough points in common
with the bite registrations. Consequently the maxillary
and mandibular arches were “digitally mounted” with
the correct intermaxillary relations (Fig 6). This procedure
could be named “digital cross-mounting” as it
replicates the process of analog cross-mounting (Fig 6).
A fourth impression (auxiliary scan) of the maxillary
arch with the provisional prosthesis in situ was taken.
a b
Figs 4a and 4b Occlusal photographs of natural abutments and healed implants with scan bodies in situ and opacizing powder used
to accelerate the scan.
a
b Figs 5a and 5b Digital impressions of the maxillary and mandibular
arches before intermaxillary registration.
VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017 705
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
Once again, care was taken to extend the acquisition to
the surrounding structures (rugae palatine, periodontal
structures) that provide the references to superimpose
the different digital impressions. The aim of the auxiliary
scan was to provide the dental laboratory technician with
information regarding the functionalized provisional
prosthesis, such as the incisal edge position, the occlusal
plane, the incisal and canine guidance, the occlusal contacts,
and the width and length of the teeth (Fig 7).
Once the intermaxillary relation was established in
the planning software, the abutments were chosen
from the software library (Variobase abutments,
Straumann).
Before proceeding, the accuracy of the scanned
implant position was tested: a resin jig was designed
with the software, milled, luted on the abutments, and
tried intraorally (Fig 8). Since good fit and precision
were found both clinically and radiographically, the
digital impression was accurate and the process of fabricating
a new, implant-supported provisional was
started. The remaining natural abutments (the maxillary
right and left canines and left second premolar)
were “virtually” extracted and the provisional restoration
was designed on the basis of the information
regarding the shapes and volumes of the tooth-supported
provisional that was previously scanned (Figs 9
and 10). Ovate pontics were designed at the planned
extraction sites to guide soft tissue healing and condia
b
Figs 6a and 6b Bite registration using the provisional restoration. This registration allows mounting of the maxillary and mandibular
digital impressions in the correct relation.
a
b
c
Figs 7a to 7c Digital impression of
the maxillary arch with the provisional
prosthesis.
706 VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
tioning.18,19 Canine and incisal guidance were checked
with the “digital articulator” function of the software.
The project was then realized by milling a PMMA block,
the new provisional was luted to the Variobase abutments
and sent to the dental clinic. The three remaining
natural abutments were removed and socket preservation
procedures were performed to maintain bone
volume at the pontic sites. A few minutes after the surgical
session, the screw-retained provisional was delivered
to the patient: it demonstrated excellent fit and
precision and only minor occlusal adjustments were
needed (Fig 11).
The implant-supported provisional prosthesis was
kept for 7 months for complete healing at the
extraction sites and complete soft tissue conditioning
(Fig 11). This period was also useful to test once again
the prosthetic project. Since no damage (chipping or
fracture) to the resin was found and no screw loosening
recorded, the project was considered appropriate and
it was decided to replicate it in a more durable material.
A new digital impression of the implant-supported
provisional was taken to record the soft tissues around
the implants and the ovate pontic areas and to visualize
eventual occlusal wear. This impression was
matched with the virtual “master model” and the
implant analogs (Fig 12).
a
b
Figs 8a and 8b Design and try-in of the verifying jig.
Figs 9a and 9b The maxillary and mandibular digital impressions in the correct intermaxillary relations after the digital
cross-mounting procedure in the dental technician software. Natural abutments have been “virtually” extracted and Variobase
abutments placed on implants.
a b
Fig 10 Superimposition of the digital impressions of the
implants and of the provisional restoration.
VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017 707
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
A definitive screw-retained rehabilitation in monolithic
zirconia with porcelain veneering limited to the
labial surface was manufactured.20 A virtual cut-back of
the vestibular surface from the digital impression of the
provisional was performed to allow porcelain stratification.
Occlusal and palatal surfaces were left unmodified,
since no veneering was to be performed. The zirconia
framework was milled with an occlusal surface
identical to the provisional after 7 months of use and
tried-in to verify the fit and occlusal contacts according
to a mutually protected occlusal scheme (Fig 13).
Maxillary and mandibular resin casts were produced
with a three-dimensional (3D) printing machine based
on STL-files (Dreve Dentamid) to position the zirconia
framework and to facilitate the veneering of feldspathic
porcelain.
The occlusal and palatal areas were infiltrated with
colors optimized for zirconia, and the vestibular aspect
was veneered with porcelain (E-max Ceram, Ivoclar
Vivadent). The prosthesis was cemented to the titanium
abutments with resin cement (Panavia F, Kuraray)
and delivered to the patient (Fig 14).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Complex rehabilitations require a considerable amount
of time and effort in treatment planning, and several
stages of treatment with one of more provisional restorations.

The possibility to keep the information during the
transition from the provisional to the final restorations
has been analyzed in previous papers. The cross-mounting
technique, as described by Calesini et al11 in 1996,
allows a perfect interchange of the casts, replicating the
provisional restoration with the mastercasts of both
arches.11 All the combinations of the four casts (two of
a b
c
Figs 11a to 11c Occlusal views of the maxillary arch (a) immediately
after tooth extraction, (b) after the delivery of the monolithic
PMMA implant supported provisional restoration (same day),
and (c) after 7 months of healing.
Fig 12 Digital project of the final restoration.
708 VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
the provisional arches and two mastercasts) could be
mounted on the same articulator at the same vertical
dimension and with the same 3D spatial relationships.
In the same articulator, with the aid of silicon indexes
recorded on the provisional casts, it is also possible to
combine the information regarding the final restorations
with the mastercasts.
New technology, such as digital impressions and
computer-aided design/computer-assisted manufacture
(CAD/CAM), has improved the production of prosthetic
devices in prosthodontics. The possibility to have
precise reproductions of dental arches is not sufficient
in cases when intermaxillary relation is difficult to
record. This is the case when one or both arches are
edentulous. The authors developed a protocol to
record the intermaxillary relation in a digital manner to
have a fully digital workflow. The protocol was inspired
by the “cross-mounting” procedure that was used for
several years by the authors, but modified to be used
with digital technology, which simplified the process
for the clinician and the dental technician.
The software acquires the impressions of the edentulous
arch and the opposing arch, and records the
correct relation through the scan of the buccal aspect
in occlusion with the provisional restoration in situ.
After the superimposition, the bite registration with the
provisional is removed in the software and the result is
the visualization of the two arches in the correct intermaxillary
relation. Furthermore, the software overlaps
the provisional prosthesis to verify the functional and
esthetic information, such as incisal edge position,
incisal guidance, tooth volumes, and posterior occlusal
contacts. This results in an easier design of the final
rehabilitation that is identical to the provisional.
A consequence of this approach is to emphasize the
importance of the provisional phase, which is, in the
authors’ opinion, part of the diagnostic phase. For this
reason great care is taken to provide the patient with a
temporary restoration that should be esthetically and
functionally adequate. Several adjustments should be
made and kept in the mouth and tested for a reasonable
period of time. The design of the provisional and
adjustments made to adapt it to patient’s function and
esthetics are time consuming; thus, once an adequate
and pleasing result is achieved, the information gained
should not be lost during the rest of the treatment: the
final rehabilitation should be identical to the temporary
prosthesis in a more durable material.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr Catherine DeFuria for her language review. The
authors thank Pasquale Lacasella and Francesco Grieco for their help
in the laboratory procedures.
Fig 13 Zirconia framework try in. The framework is obtained by
a digital duplicate of the provisional and a virtual cut-back of the
vestibular surfaces.
Fig 14 Intraoral view of the final rehabilitation in place.
VOLUME 48 • NUMBER 9 • OCTOBER 2017 709
QUINTESSENCE INTERNATIONAL
Venezia et al
REFERENCES
 1. Israelson H, Plemons JM, Watkins P, Sory C. Barium-coated surgical stents and
computer-assisted tomography in the preoperative assessment of dental
implant patients. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 1992;12: 52–61.
 2. Silverman MM. Accurate measurement of vertical dimension by phonetics
and the closest speaking centric space. Part I. Dent Digest 1951;57: 261–265.
 3. Pound E. Cross arch splinting vs. premature extractions. J Prosthet Dent
1966;16: 1058–1068.
 4. Pound E. Let /S/ be your guide. J Prosthet Dent 1977;38: 482–489.
 5. Rivera-Morales WC, Mohl ND. Variability of closest speaking space compared
with interocclusal distance in dentulous subjects. J Prosthet Dent 1991;65:
228–232.
 6. Rivera-Morales WC, Mohl ND. Relationship of occlusal vertical dimension to
the health of the masticatory system. J Prosthet Dent 1991;65: 547–553.
 7. Gross MD, Ormianer Z. A preliminary study on the effect of occlusal vertical
dimension increase on mandibular postural rest position. Int J Prosthodont
1994;7: 216–226.
 8. Fradeani M. Phonetic Analysis: Appraising the dentolabial relationship during
phonesis to determine ideal incisal length, adequate tooth position and correct
vertical dimension of occlusion. In: Fradeani M. Esthetic rehabilitation in
fixed prosthodontics, Vol 1: Esthetic analysis. Chicago: Quintessence Publishing,
2004.
 9. Zitzmann NU, Marinello CP. Treatment plan for restoring the edentulous
maxilla with implant-supported restorations: removable overdenture versus
fixed partial denture design. J Prosthet Dent 1999;82: 188–196.
 10. Biscaro L, Becatelli A, Poggio PM, Soattin M, Rossini F. The One-Model Technique:
a new method for immediate loading with fixed prostheses in edentuolous
or potentially edentulous jaws. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent
2009;29: 306–313.
 11. Calesini G, Bruschi GB, Scipioni A, Micarelli C. Il montaggio crociato in protesi
ancorata ad impianti osteointegrati. Quintessence Int 1996;8/9:435.
 12. Venezia P, Lacasella P, Cordaro L, Torsello F, Cavalcanti R. The BARI technique:
a new approach to immediate loading. Int J Esthet Dent 2015;10: 428–443.
 13. Cordaro L, Torsello F, Ercoli C, Gallucci G. Transition from failing dentition to a
fixed implant-supported restoration: a staged approach. Int J Periodontics
Restorative Dent 2007;27: 481–487.
 14. Cochran DL, Jackson JM, Bernard JP, et al. A 5-year prospective multicenter
study of early loaded titanium implants with a sandblasted and acid-etched
surface. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 2011;26: 1324–1332.
 15. Buser D, Janner SF, Wittneben JG, Brägger U, Ramseier CA, Salvi GE. 10-year
survival and success rates of 511 titanium implants with a sandblasted and
acid-etched surface: a retrospective study in 303 partially edentulous patients.
Clin Implant Dent Relat Res 2012;14: 839–851.
 16. Bornstein MM, Wittneben JG, Brägger U, Buser D. Early loading at 21 days of
non-submerged titanium implants with a chemically modified sandblasted
and acid-etched surface: 3-year results of a prospective study in the posterior
mandible. J Periodontol 2010;81: 809–818.
 17. Kattadiyil MT, Mursic Z, AlRumaih H, Goodacre CJ. Intraoral scanning of hard
and soft tissues for partial removable dental prosthesis fabrication. J Prosthet
Dent 2014;112: 444–448.
 18. Kinsel RP, Lamb RE. Development of gingival esthetics in the terminal dentition
patient prior to dental implant placement using a full-arch transitional
fixed prosthesis: a case report. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 2001;16: 583–589.
 19. Cordaro L, Torsello F. Soft tissue conditioning by immediate restoration of
immediately placed implants in full-arch rehabilitation: the double provisional
technique. Eur J Esthet Dent 2006;1: 216–229.
 20. Venezia P, Torsello F, Cavalcanti R, D’Amato S. Retrospective analysis of 26
complete-arch implant-supported monolithic zirconia prostheses with feldspathic
porcelain veneering limited to the facial surface. J Prosthet Dent
2015;114: 506–512. 
Copyright of Quintessence International is the property of Quintessence Publishing Company
Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.