REFERENCE M A N U AL V 39 I NO 6 17 / 18
Management of the Developing Dentition and
Occlusion in Pediatric Dentistry______
Review Council
Council on Clinical Affairs
Latest Revision
2014
Purpose
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) recognizes
the importance of managing the developing dentition
and occlusion and its effect on the well-being of infants,
children, and adolescents. Management includes the recognition,
diagnosis, and appropriate treatment of dentofacial
abnormalities. This guideline is intended to set forth objectives
for management of the developing dentition and occlusion in
pediatric dentistry.
Methods
This guideline was originally developed by the Clinical Affairs
Committee-Developing Dentition Subcommittee and adopted
in 1990. This document is a revision of the previous version,
last revised in 2009. This revision is based upon a new PubMed®/MEDLINE
search using the terms: tooth ankylosis,
Class II malocclusion, Class III malocclusion, interceptive ortho-dontic
treatment, evidence-based, dental crowding, ectopic
eruption, dental impaction, obstruction sleep apnea syndrome
(OSAS), occlusal development, craniofacial development,
craniofacial growth, airway, facial growth, oligodontia, oral
habits, occlusal wear and dental erosion, anterior crossbite,
posterior crossbite, space maintenance, third molar development,
and tooth size/arch length discrepancy; fields: all; limits:
within the last 10 years, humans, English, and birth through
age 18. Papers for review were chosen from these searches and
from references within selected articles. When data did not
appear sufficient or were inconclusive, recommendations were
based upon expert and/or consensus opinion by experienced
researchers and clinicians.
Background
Guidance of eruption and development of the primary, mixed,
and permanent dentitions is an integral component of comprehensive
oral health care for all pediatric dental patients.
Such guidance should contribute to the development of a
permanent dentition that is in a stable, functional, and esthetically
acceptable occlusion and normal subsequent dentofacial
development. Early diagnosis and successful treatment of
developing malocclusions can have both short-term and longterm
benefits while achieving the goals of occlusal harmony
and function and dentofacial esthetics.1'4 Dentists have the
responsibility to recognize, diagnose, and manage or refer
abnormalities in the developing dentition as dictated by the
complexity of the problem and the individual clinicians training,
knowledge, and experience.5
Many factors can affect the management of the developing
dental arches and minimize the overall success of any treatment.
The variables associated with the treatment of the
developing dentition that will affect the degree to
treatment is successful include, but are not limited to:
which
i. Chronological/mental/emotional age of the patient
and the patient’s ability to understand and cooperate
in the treatment.
2. Intensity, frequency, and duration of an oral habit.
3. Parental support for the treatment.
4. Compliance with clinician’s instructions.
5. Craniofacial configuration.
6. Craniofacial growth.
7. Concomitant systemic disease or condition.
8. Accuracy of diagnosis.
9. Appropriateness of treatment.
10. Timing of treatment.
A thorough clinical examination, appropriate pretreatment
records, differential diagnosis, sequential treatment plan, and
progress records are necessary to manage any condition affecting
the developing dentition.
Clinical examination should include:
1. Facial analysis to:
a. identify adverse transverse growth patterns including
asymmetries (maxillary and mandibular);
b. identify adverse vertical growth patterns;
c. identify adverse sagittal (anteroposterior) growth
patterns and dental anteroposterior (AP) occlusal
disharmonies; and
d. assess esthetics and identify orthopedic and
orthodontic interventions that may improve
esthetics and resultant self-image and emotional
development.
ABBREVIATIONS
AAPD: American Academy Pediatric Dentistry. AP: Anteroposterior.
CBCT: Cone-beam computed tomography. EE: Ectopic eruption.
OSAS: Obstruction sleep apnea syndrome.
3 34 R EC O M M EN D ATIO N S: BEST PRACTICES