253
on the body, or on isolated extremities, i
by V. T. Innod.
M. Innod has invented a peculiar ap-’
paratus for the purpose of augmenting or
diminishing the pressure of the atmosphere on the body, and has made with it several
experiments, the results of which he
describes, and from which it appears that
when atmospheric pressure is increased
by one half, the respiratory functions
become more active, the pulse is fuller, and
the brain is stimulated by an increased
quantity of blood carried to it. On the
contrary, when the pressure is diminished
by one quarter, the respiration becomes
difficult and oppressed, the skin is painfully
hot, hemorrhage supervenes, and
the patient becomes lethargic. M. INNOD
reports three cases in which the above
principles were successfully applied to the
treatment of nervous affections and
dyspnoea. :
3rd. Researches on the treatment of
some diseases of the eyes, by M. PAMARD.
This paper is not completed.
Propositions G&eacute;n&eacute;rales sur l’ Ophthalmologie,
&c. Par JULES LicHEL. Paris, Germer
Bailliere. 1834.
Tms is the avant courier of a work which
M. LICHEL is about to publish on the diseases
of the eye, and from the manner in
which it is executed we have no doubt
that the author will supply in a creditable
way the want which still exists in France
of some standard work on the diseases of
the eye. As yet the French surgeons
have produced nothing upon this subject,
and are obliged to have recourse to translations
from the English, German, or
Italian authors. The foundation upon
which M. LicHEL sets out is an excellent
one ; he observes that from the structure
of the human eye we are enabled to see
in it many of those physiological changes
which, in other parts of the body, we
merely conclude to exist from very uncertain
data ; he therefore attaches himself
principally to determine the anatomical
character of those diseases during life ; to
anticipate, as it were, pathological anatomy,
and thus to refer in the most certain
manner, the organic lesions of the
affection to which they really belong.
We understand, and many friends on
this side of the water may be glad to be
informed, that M. LICHEL gives, as he
has done for some years, a most excellent
private course on ophthalmology, which is
attended by most of the foreign medical
men who remain in Paris for instruction.
He charges but five francs for his course,.
and shows at each lecture at least twenty
interesting eye cases, which are examined
by each pupil in turn. M. LICHEL obtains
the attendance of the patients at his
course by giving them medicine and medical
advice gratuitously.
A Dictionary of Terms employed 4 fTie
French in Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology,
Practical Medicine, Surgery, Midwifery,
Pharmacy, Medical Zoology,
Botany, and Chemistry; with their Derivations
from tlae Greek and Latin;
their Synonyms in the Greek, Latin,
French, Gezhnan, and English; Explanations
in English; ; and Illustrations in
the Different Languages. By SHrRr.Fr
PALMER, M.D. Part I. Longman, 1834.
8vo. pp.160.
Tms is a contribution at the altar of
medicine which deserves the eulogies of
the press. It is, in fact, one of those
works respecting which reviewers generally
break into ecstatic exclamations
of wonder at the labour and research
of the author. " The like of such talent
and industry was never known," quoth
most journals, whenever a volume is
issued which shows that the compiler is
a man of learning and assiduity. The
effect would be unfortunate, if the journals were much diffused, for the profession,
finding every goose dressed in the feathers
of a superior bird, would cease to listen to
the cry of "swan," and every now and
then a true swan would really sail down
the stream unadmired and unsought.
We hope that from no cause will it be
the fate of Dr. PALMER’S Dictionary.- " swan-like to sing and die," for he has
conceived a work, and here given birth
to the first part of it, which will prove of
remarkable use to those for whose reference
it is designed,-a class who are thus
described :-