At present, in the developed world we are living in an environment of excess, also known as “too much”. We have within reach an excess of products that go beyond what is necessary to cover our basic needs and which market pressures prompt us to desire and consume. These social changes inevitably influence medicine as well.

Without a doubt, progress has brought very positive consequences for mankind and, even though medicine has never been able to prepare diagnostics with greater precision or achieved so many recoveries, the fact remains that not always more medicine leads to better results. For instance, the country in which public health expenditure per capita is highest is probably the United States1 even though other countries are well beyond in many health indicators. This has given rise to a current of thought which, under the motto “less is more”, endeavors to alert society about the pitfalls of excessive medicine.

A search in Pubmed can produce publications of the late 40s of the past century that already discuss unnecessary medical procedures, above all in surgery.2–5 However, it was not until the 70s that the first articles using “overdiagnosis” and “overtreatment” in their title were published. Overdiagnosis is defined as the diagnostic of a disease that will not produce significant symptoms throughout the life of an individual but the treatment and follow-up of which could give rise to damages and costs without any clear benefit for the patient.6,7 This does not involve diagnostic errors or false positives, it is rather the detection of abnormalities that do not produce symptoms and which will probably not shorten the life expectancy of an individual. The awareness of such abnormalities could induce iatrogeny due to diagnostic tests and unnecessary treatments, i.e., “overtreatment” induced by overdiagnosing.

Concern surrounding the issue has skyrocketed in recent years. In fact, over 90% of articles approaching it were published in this century, mostly in the last 5 years. Possibly the subject on which most publications have focused is on screening for breast, prostate and thyroid cancer as well as melanoma,8–14 even though “excessive medicine” is not limited to oncology as it includes nearly any chronic disease.14–18

Overtreatment and overdiagnosis has prompted scientific societies, health institutions and experts in different fields to prepare and disseminate recommendations supported by evidence-based medicine to diminish specific clinic practices that scarcely provide value. In recent years, said institutions have organized international meetings on the issue such as the international conference for prevention of overdiagnosis. The 4th edition of this conference was recently held in Barcelona. At these conferences, various prestigious scientific journals and blogs, including BMJ or JAMA or, in Spain, the Society of Primary Health Care Pharmacists of Spain, debated on the best approach to these problems, free from the pressures of the pharmaceutical industry.

Some journals have set up sections specifically dedicated on said issue (Too much medicine in the case of BMJ and less is more in the case of JAMA). In this regard, one of the most internationally consolidated initiatives is the Choosing Wisely campaign launched in 2012 by the Foundation of the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) with the support of several scientific societies. The objective of this initiative is to promote a national debate to avoid useless or unnecessary examinations, tests, medical treatments and procedures. The implementation of similar initiatives could have a significant impact in the future for adapting the use of health resources and help to diminish iatrogeny. A survey carried out by said foundation among 600 family doctors and other medical specialists reported that 30% of respondents admitted to carrying out tests or procedures they regarded as unnecessary with a frequency exceeding once a week, and that 3 out of 4 believed that unnecessary procedures and tests are a serious problem for the health system.

Similarly, since 2007 the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) of the United Kingdom has made a list of some clinical practices they explicitly recommend avoiding (“Do not do”) either because they don’t yield any benefits, the risk-benefit ratio is not clear or because there is insufficient evidence to recommend systematic use thereof. By March 2014 the “Do not do” database comprised 972 recommendations.

In our country, 3 similar initiatives have been implemented in parallel in the course of 2013, i.e., the “Commitment to Quality by Scientific Societies” led by the Ministry of Health, Social Services and Equality, that to date has been endorsed by 39 scientific societies including the Ophthalmological Society of Spain, even though no recommendations have been published yet. The second initiative is the Essencial project of the Health Quality and Evaluation Agency of Catalonia (AQuAS) and the third is the recommendations to abstain issued by the Society of Family and Community Medicine of Spain (semFYC).

In the case of AQuAS, their blog published the results of the survey carried out in 2015 among primary health care physicians (specialists in family and pediatric medicine) of the Catalan Institute of Health of the North Metropolitan Area in order to explore the degree of awareness and viewpoints of physicians about practices that add very little value. Overall, 69% of 250 physicians indicated that said practices were frequent or very frequent in their daily activity and 80% indicated that at least once a week they found themselves in the situation of deciding about a request for a test or treatment they regarded as unnecessary.

In what concerns recommendations, the Essencial project has developed over 50 for health professionals as well as for patients. The document issued by semFYC describes 15 recommendations that basically involve situations of the daily clinical practice of family doctors. As in the Health Ministry project, none of the 2 initiatives comprises a specific recommendations in ophthalmology. However, the Choosing Wisely initiative comprises 10 recommendations about doubtful practices in the ophthalmic field issued by the American Association of Pediatric Opthalmology and Strabismus and the American Academy of Ophtalmology.

There are very few publications that approach the issue of overdiagnosing in ophthalmology,19,20 although without a doubt ophthalmologists produce overdiagnosis and overtreatment in our daily practice. For instance, in the field of glaucoma we have seen in recent years a significant expansion of what is considered to be a disease. At present, a significant proportion of the ophthalmological community considers that ocular hypertension and normotensive glaucoma should be treated even though a thorough reading of the Ocular hypertension treatment study indicates that the number requiring treatment, in the order of 20, probably does not justify the systematic treatment of ocular hypertension.21

Despite the fact that the glaucoma subspecialty is the area in which overdiagnosis is probably most relevant, the fact is that in all subspecialties we can find similar examples. To restrict the systematic pre-surgery requests for the majority of ophthalmological surgeries and avoiding the prescription of antibiotic prophylaxis prior to cataract surgery are clear examples of well identified overuse.

It can be concluded that the “excess of medicine” is a current problem that affects ophthalmologists and that must be approached and corrected in order to provide safer and more efficient healthcare for our patients. We may disagree in the dimensions of the problem but no one can deny that overdiagnosis exists and that “too much ophthalmology” is also counterproductive. It is obvious that addressing this issue is one of the ethical challenges of present day ophthalmology because it goes against the health interests of individuals, gives rise to social alarm and diminishes the efficiency of the health system.22 It would be interesting to identify the most prevalent forms of overuse in our specialty and to have the backing of a list of “Do not do” recommendations in our daily clinical practice. We should never forget that on many occasions it could be indicated to “undiagnose and unprescribe”. Only by becoming aware of this issue we shall be able to include 21st-century ophthalmology in the Choosing Wisely culture.