Pergamon
Int. 1. Radiation Oncology Biol. Phys., Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 1177- 1183, 1995
Copyright 0 1995 Elsevier Science Ltd
Printed in the USA. All rights reserved
0360-3016/95 $9.50 + .oO
0360-3016(95)00006-2
l Technical Innovations and Notes
AN EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH TO THE DESIGN OF A SCATTERING
SYSTEM FOR A PROTON THERAPY BEAM LINE DEDICATED TO
OPTHALMOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS
CATHERINE NAURAYE,* ALEJANDRO MAZAL, PH.D.,* SABINE DELACROIX, PH.D.,*
ANDI& BRIDIER, PH.D.,+ JEAN CHAVAUDRA, PH.D.+ AND JEAN-CLAUDE ROSENWALD, PH.D.*
*Centre de Protontherapie d’Orsay, Orsay, France; ‘Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; and %stitut Curie, Paris, France
Purpose: The development of a scattering system for a proton therapy beam line dedicated to ophtahnologiGi&@IlapplicatiOIlS.

Methods and Materials: A protontherapy beam line has been developed for the treatment of uveal melanoma
at the Orsay synchrocyclotron. The original 200 MeV proton beam is degraded to 76 MeV and the final
beam characteristics (range, modulation, flatness, collimation) are obtained with beam modifiers in the
treatment room. A passive scattering system is used to obtain a uniform dose distribution in the beam
cross-section throughout 30 mm in diameter, with minimal losses in energy and dose rate. We have used
an experimental approach for the scattering study.
Results: An elliptical ring shaped from 0.1~mm thick lead is the solution we have adopted for the scattering
system. For a modulated beam, a flatness of 1% is obtained on transverse profiles. The energy loss introduced
by this scatterer is only 0.5 MeV, with no appreciable change in the range over the treatment field. For an
unmodulated beam, 21% of intensity is lost when the scatterer is used. The distal and the lateral dose falloff
@O-10%) for a modulated beam are 2.6 mm. These last values are independent of the range and the
modulation currently used for the ophtalmic applications.
Conclusion: A specific passive scattering system can be adapted to a particular beam emittance. A systematic
experimental approach can easily be undertaken to obtain the scatterer adapted for small irradiation fields
in-proton therapy.
Radiotherapy, Protons, Scattering, Ophtalmology.
INTRODUCTION
Proton beams are used for high precision radiotherapy
when clinical targets are close to critical structures.
Useful physical characteristics of the beam include
the sharp fall-off after a spread out Bragg peak and
the small lateral penumbra.
Clinical facilities are developed either from new or
from existing machines not used anymore for physical
research. At the Centre de Protontherapie d’Orsay
(CPO), we use a synchrocyclotron built in 1958 and
completely upgraded in 1977. It has been devoted to
clinical application since 199 1, providing a 200 MeV
proton beam with extracted currents up to about 2pA
(2, 10). Figure 1 shows three lines that can be used at
the CPO. Many things (beam transport, building, etc.)
ought to be changed for an optimal clinical use of the
beam, but these changes need a long investigation time
and are expensive. However, a set of beam modifier
devices is necessary to obtain beam characteristics
suitable for treatment.
To get the necessary uniformity in the radiation field
required for the clinical treatments, many different
methods for lateral spreading of the beam have been
investigated in different centers around the world.
These methods use either dynamic or static beam delivery
systems.
Dynamic systems, such as wobbler system (3), raster-scan
(4), or spot scan (7) control the motion of the
beam spot to deliver the desired dose distribution in
the radiation field. The advantage of these systems,
over the passive systems, is the minimization of the
material in the beam path, with lower energy losses
and background radiation for the patients. Moreover,
Reprint requests to: Catherine Nauraye, Centre de Protonthtrapie
d’orsay, bltiment 101, 15 rue Georges ClCmenceau, 91400
Orsay, France.
Acknowledgement-Financial support provided by the Institut
de Formation Supkieure Biomkdicale (University Paris XI),
to C. Nauraye.
Accepted for publication 30 December 1994.
1177 
I. J. Radiation Oncology l Biology 0 F’hysics
Fig. 1. Layout of the building with the different beam lines
and treatment rooms. Ai: bend magnets; yi: quadripole lenses;
synchrocyclotron (S): maximum energy of protons 200 MeV;
energy degradation with a graphite block (D): 200 MeV down
to 76 MeV; treatment room 1 (TRl), for small irradiation fields,
less than 10 cm in diameter; planned treatment room 2 (TR2),
for large irradiation fields.
the spot-scanning system allows a three-dimensional
scanning of the target volume (8, 13).
For technical reasons, many centers use passive systems,
such as single or double scattering foils with
annular or cylindrical beam stoppers (1, 9), or scatterers
with a Gaussian-like shape (6). Calculations of
such scattering systems must be performed to minimize
losses in energy and dose rate. They are carried
out for divergent beams with a small focus and radial
symmetry.
In our specific case, the use of an energy degrader
and the limitations of the beam transport system result
in a large focus spot at the entrance of the treatment
room. The beam’s vertical and horizontal emittances
are very different, giving a beam section with an elliptical
shape.
The aim of the first part of our clinical project was
to treat uveal melanomas (12). Therefore, energies
around 70 MeV and field sizes up to 30 mm in diameter,
with dose rates of about 15 Gy/min, are needed.
To keep a stable beam cross-section at the patient
position, in case of small movements of the original
beam, we have fixed, as first specification, a beam
diameter of 40 mm, finally collimated to a diameter
of 30 mm.
In this paper, we present an experimental approach
Volume 32, Number 4, 1995
used to optimize the characteristics of the scattering
system developed for proton therapy of ocular
melanomas.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
Detectors
Three detectors have been used: radiological films, diodes,
and one ionization chamber. The radiological films’
have been used for acquisition of transverse dose profiles
in the air. These films have a low sensitivity to irradiation
allowing doses up to 4 Gy. They have been manually
processed and explored with an optical densitometer,’
which uses a pulsed infrared-beam collimated to a diameter
of 0.8 mm, at the entrance of the film. An optical
density correction curve function of dose, obtained for
the same conditions of irradiation, has been applied.
Ordinary electronics diodes (lN4006, N-type) were
preirradiated to 10 kGy, before being used, with no bias
voltage, to measure the transverse dose profiles. The cylindrical
ionization chamber’ (sensitive volume 0.14 cm3,
diameter 6 mm, and polarizing voltage 300 V) connected
to the electrometer,4 has been irradiated parallel to its
main axis (11) for acquisition of transverse dose profiles,
depth dose curves, and dose rate measurements.
Beam delivery system
The beam is focused close to the vacuum window at
the entrance of the first treatment room. An optical bench,
2-m long, supports all the beam delivery system, and is
placed after the vacuum window. A length of 2.48 m is
available from the middle of the target volume (reference
point) to the vacuum window.
A direct correlation exists between the study of the
scattering system and the role of other components of
the optical bench. The final bench configuration used for
ophtalmological applications, including the scatterer presented
in this work, is shown in Fig. 2. A set of collimators
is used to limit scattered components and to keep a specific
beam size at different locations (CO to C5). A range
shifter and a range-modulating propeller are used to adjust
the range and the modulation of the Bragg peak in depth
for each patient. Two multisector transmission ionization
chambers are used for dose monitoring, with related control
of dose rate and symmetry.
Beam characteristics
The original beam (200 MeV) has been degraded down
to 76 MeV with a graphite cylinder upstream from the
last bend (Fig. 1). Figure 3a shows the Bragg peak at
the treatment position adopted as the reference point, as
measured with a lucite wedge moving in front of the
ionization chamber. The distal fall-off (90-10%) of the
’ Kodak X-Omat V.
* Wellhofer WR 102.
3 Wellhofer IClO.
4 Wellhofer WP 5007. 
Scattering system for a proton therapy beam line 0 C. NAURAYE et al. 1179
modulator
Collimator
Monitor
scalterer
ionization Patient
J
chamber collimator
3
0 m f--
I234 206 1841 153 108 ss 44 7 ocm
248 178
co*3 Cl co3 C2Q3 c3@4 c4 @4 C5 93 cm
Fig. 2. Ophtalmological beam line (optical bench) in treatment room 1
original Bragg peak is 2.1 5 0.1 mm (1 standard deviation).
A “reference” clinical situation has been adopted.
It corresponds to the following spread-out Bragg peak
parameters illustrated in Fig. 3b: modulation width of
18.8 mm (from 90% proximal to 90% distal level in
depth), range of 22.6 mm in water (at 90% distal level).
The dose distributions measured by film dosimetry in
a plane normal to the beam axis, at the exit of vacuum
window and at the reference point, respectively, without
beam modifier or collimators, are presented in Fig. 4.
From dose measurements at different distances on central
beam axis, an effective source was found according to
the inverse square law distance, to be about 10 cm downstream
from the vacuum window. For a beam current of
300 nA before the graphite degrader, the current measured
just after the vacuum window is 17 nA.
Experimental approach
When passing through matter, a proton undergoes collisions
leading to a modification of its initial path. These
deflexions result essentially from elastic collisions with
atomic nuclei. This phenomenon is described by the multiple
scattering theories. Recently, a good comparison be0
10 20 30 40 50
Water depth (mm)
Fig. 3. Dose distribution in depth at the reference point (target
volume), measured with a cylindrical ionization chamber (0.1
cc) behind a moving wedge (source-detector distance constant):
(A) Bragg peak for an unmodulated beam; (B) spread-out Bragg
peak in ophtalmological “reference” beam situation.
tween the different theories and experimental data has
been carried out by Gottschalk et al. (5).
So, greatest scattering is obtained with elements of high
atomic number as they have a large scattering power for
a small energy loss. Lead, brass, and tungsten are the
most usual materials used as scatterers. For practical reasons,
we have tested different geometrical configurations
using only lead scatterers.
Different parameters such as the thickness, the position,
the shape, and the size of the scatterer have been systematically
investigated. The purpose is to minimize the dose
rate loss, to keep the shape of the Bragg peak, and to have
a uniform dose distribution in the whole target volume,
independent of the irradiation conditions.
The measurements consist mostly of transverse dose
profiles and depth curves. The dose profiles have been
measured in air at the reference distance. Using a moving
lucite wedge, depth dose curves have been obtained at
a constant source-detector distance converted into water
equivalent depth.
rizontal
m
Relaye dose (%)
30
50
Fig. 4. Original dose distribution in a transverse plane of the
beam axis. (A) Immediately downstream of the vacuum window;
(B) at the reference point, without collimation. 
1180 I. J. Radiation Oncology l Biology l Physics
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Uniform scattering of the beam
When the original beam is emitted from a small focal
spot, with a small divergence, a first scattering foil is
generally used to get a larger beam before it hits a second
scattering system. In our experimental conditions, the
presence of the beam degrader makes a double scattering
system unnecessary, because of the large initial divergence
of the beam and the large beam spot. To achieve
a good definition of the effective source, one could collimate
the entrance beam to one point. However, to avoid
intensity losses, we have decided not to do so.
On the computed model from Gotschalk et al. (5),
based on Moliere’s theory, we have calculated the distribution
function of scattered protons through a lead foil
placed at the C2 position, by introducing the characteristics
of our beam: the divergence and the effective source
position measured from dose profiles at different distances
from the vacuum window, and finally the beam energy.
Figure 5 shows the vertical dose distributions at patient
position for several thicknesses of lead. The original beam
has been computed, taking into account the scattering due
to the air space between the effective source and the
measuring point. Due to the Gaussian form of the dose
profile, good homogeneity in the central part of the beam
is only obtained with large losses in energy and beam
intensity, as a consequence of a thick scattering foil that
appears not to be a good solution.
Selected scattering of the beam
A common solution to improve the shape of the
transverse dose profile is to use a small beam stopper
of sufficient thickness to stop a part of the beam, and
place it in such a way that it blocks the central portion
of the dose distribution (1,9). This occluder, combined
with a scattering foil, produces a larger flat-dose area
at the reference distance. This system presents the adComputed
results (h4olike
-_-___- mukiple scattering theory)
80 - Experimentids results
z
9160
3
$40
2
20
0
0 5 10 15 20
Distance from beam axis (cm)
Fig. 5. Influence on the vertical dose distribution at the reference
point, of the thickness of a single scattering foil in lead, placed
at the C2 position (Fig. 2) and for an uncollimated beam. (A)
original beam; (B) 0.1 mm; (C) 0.5 mm; (D) 1.0 mm. Comparison
between the Moliere theory and the experimental results.
Volume 32, Number 4, 1995
------------.-__________________________--------------.---
.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:,:.:.:.:.:.:.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Distance from beam axis (mm)
Fig. 6. Influence on the transverse dose distribution of the distance
between the scatterer and the reference point. The scatterer
is a lead disk (16 mm in diameter, 0.1 mm thick) placed at the
position of collimators (CO, . . C4:@3 cm; Fig. 2). The beam
is unmodulated.
vantage of introducing a uniform energy change for the
whole beam cross-section.
However, the use of a central scattering disk may increase
the efficiency of the scattering system, as no central
beam is lost. If the disk is very thin, the changes in energy
components are not of great importance in practice. So,
we have tested the possibility of spreading out only a part
of the beam without blocking any part of it.
For a fixed scatterer thickness, three other parameters
have been considered: distance from the reference point,
diameter of a thin lead disk, and diameters of a thin lead
ring. Due to complex emittance of our beam, it was not
easy to simulate these scattering systems; therefore, we
decided to carry out an experimental approach.
Effect of scatterer parameters: influence of the distance
of a disk
Figure 6 shows the effect of the scatterer distance
on the transverse dose profiles. For an unmodulated
beam, a lead disk 0.1 mm thick, 16 mm in diameter,
within the aperture of the collimator, was placed at
different distances from the reference point. The last
collimator used (C4) has a diameter of 30 mm. We
removed collimator C5 to better see the lateral effects
on the dose distribution. As shown in Fig. 6, when the
disk is either close or far from the measuring plane, its
effect is not so important. When it is close, there is not
enough distance for the scattered components to have
a significant lateral spread. The effective beam source
position is also close to the patient, leading to an increase
of the entrance dose and lateral penumbra. When
it is placed far upstream, the scattering in the air and
the beam components from a complex emittance hide
the effect of the disk. We have chosen the C2 position,
which leads to a good compromise.
In.uence of the diameter of a disk
The effect of the diameter of the central scattering disk
placed at the C2 position, for a modulated beam, is pre- 
Scattering system for a proton therapy beam line 0 C. NAURAYE et al. 1181
20
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Distance from beam axis (mm)
Fig. 7. Influence on the transverse dose distribution of the diameter
a(mm) of a scattering lead disk of 0.1 mm thick placed at
the C2 position (Fig. 2) for a modulated beam (CO, . . . C3:@3
cm; C4:@4 cm).
sented in Fig. 7. For a given position, a small disk has
no significant effect. A disk approaching the collimated
beam size has the same effect as a scattering foil covering
the whole aperture.
A optimal disk diameter and position have been
adopted to produce sufficient scattering, leading to an
underdosage in the central part of the transverse section
beam. This condition can be useful to produce smaller
lateral penumbra after collimation.
Infruence of a cylindrical ring
To fill the central part of the profile again, a central
hole has been made in the scattering disk, increasing the
beam intensity at the same time. The effect of a central
hole in the disk is shown in Fig. 8.
Injhence of an elliptical ring
The difference between the vertical and horizontal
beam emittances leads to an elliptically shaped transverse
section beam. To obtain a good uniformity in the whole
beam cross-section after scattering, the external shape of
the scatterer follows the shape of the isodose distribution
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Oistame from beam axis (mm)
Fig. 8. Influence on the transverse dose distribution, of a central
hole b(mm) in the center of a scattering lead disk (0.1 mm
thick, 18 mm external diameter), at the C2 position (Fig. 2) for
a modulated beam (CO, . . . C3:@3 cm; C4:@4 cm).
100
: a0 -*
iz
4 a--
z .___________________-------------------- ____________ _
A
s/ 40.- -
horizontal profile
d B
----- vertical profile
20 -. \
0 I
0 4 a 12 16 20
Distance from beam axis (mm)
Fig. 9. Transverse dose distribution at the reference point without
modulation measured with a diode (CO, . . . C2:@3 cm;
C3,C4:@4 cm; C5:@3 cm): (A) horizontal profile; (B) vertical
profile. The elliptical ring has a 0.1 mm thickness of lead and
is located at the C2 position (Fig. 2).
at the position of the scatterer. The selected scatterer is
an elliptical foil, 0.1 mm thick of lead, with vertical main
axis of 13 mm and horizontal axis of 20 mm. A central
circular hole of 5 mm diameter is kept. The final transverse
dose distributions in the horizontal and vertical
planes, without modulation, are presented in Fig. 9. The
sharp fall-off is due to reintroducing C5.
The study has been systematically undertaken for the
transverse, horizontal, and vertical dose distributions with
or without modulation. The choice of the final parameters
has been made to optimize the flatness, the dose rate, and
the penumbra values.
A final condition was to keep the transverse dose distribution
characteristics in the useful irradiation field (radius
15 mm), nearly independent of the modulator and range
shifter, which is easily obtained if both are placed far
upstream from the patient position. This solution is illustrated
in Fig. 10.
100
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Distance from beam axis (mm)
Fig. 10. Transverse dose distribution at the reference point for
different beam configurations, with only the collimators CO,
. . . C2:@3 cm: (A) original vertical profile; (B) with only
the elliptical scatterer; (C) two usual modulation conditions
(modulation width: 11 mm; range shifter in lucite: 10 mm and
30 mm). 
1182 I. J. Radiation Oncology 0 Biology l Physics Volume 32, Number 4, I995
The transverse scans obtained with diodes and radiological
films present the same characteristics leading to
the same lateral dose fall-off (90- 10%) of 2.6 mm, with
no significant variations with depth. Due to the importance
of the sensitive ionization chamber volume above
the dimensions of the diode junction or the detection region
of the film, the measurement of the lateral penumbra
is larger, as shown in Fig. 11. For practical reasons, most
of our initial relative transverse scan comparisons have
been made with a ionization chamber.
The flatness in the irradiation field is calculated as the
deviation against the mean dose determined by (Dose,,,
- Dose,,)/2 in the field defined by 0.8 X L (L: field
width at 50% level of the dose distribution normalized at
100% on central axis). In the “reference” modulated
beam condition, the flatness measured with a diode is
around 1%.
The effect of the final scattering system on the depth
dose curves is the same as that given by a lead foil 0.1
mm thick. We noted no significant modification in the
shape of the Bragg curve, but just a range shift of 0.8
mm in water, equivalent to an energy loss of 0.5 MeV.
As shown in Fig. 12, the range uniformity over the treatment
field is not affected by the nonuniform absorption
of the elliptical foil with central hole.
When the modulator is added, the distal fall-off
(90- 10%) increases slighty from 2.1 + 0.1 mm (1 standard
deviation) for the original Bragg peak to 2.6 ? 0.2
mm (1 standard deviation) for the spread-out Bragg peak.
For a beam current of 300 nA before the graphite degrader,
17 nA after the vacuum window, the dose rate at
the reference point without the scatterer, the modulator,
and the range-shifter is about 60 Gy/min at the phantom
surface. The dose ratio between the entrance and the peak
is 3.6. The loss in dose rate introduced by the scatterer
4 60
f
2 40
+
20
0 . . . : . . . : . . . : . . . : .\-. ,
-*._
0 4 8 12 16 20
Distance from beam axis (mm)
Fig, 11. Transverse dose distribution at the reference point, in
“reference” condition with different detectors (CO, . . . C2:@3
cm; C3,C4:@4 cm; C5:@3 cm): (A) cylindrical ionization chamber
0.1 cc; (B) diode lN4006.
C2cm Relative dose (%)
10
30
.9
I
50
70
E
i 90 10
5
%
8
2
z
a
Fig. 12. Dose distribution in depth, in the horizontal plane, for
a modulated beam. The measurements are carried out with a
diode in the water tank. The range uniformity over the treatment
field is not affected by the nonuniform absorption of the elliptical
foil with central hole.
is 21% for an unmodulated beam at the reference point.
A final dose rate of 18 Gy/min in the middle of the spreadout
Bragg peak is obtained for the “reference” beam
condition.
CONCLUSION
A systematic experimental method can easily be undertaken
to obtain a passive scattering system, an elliptical
ring shaped to be adapted to a particular beam emittance,
for ophtalmological protontherapy. The optimization criteria
are the Bragg curve (peak sharpness and maximal
depth), the transverse flatness, the beam size, and the
beam intensity loss. The main parameters used are the
position, the shape, the thickness, and the internal and
external sizes of the ring.
With our experimental approach, a scatterer following
the shape of the original beam cross-section (elliptical)
has been experimentally obtained giving beam intensity
losses of only 21%, and a flatness of 1% for a modulated
beam of transverse section 3 1 mm (at the 50% dose level).
The final transverse scan is symmetrical and independent
of the modulator and the range-shifter.
For larger fields, more complex solutions should be
devised (e.g., double scattering system) including the calculation
of the profile of the scatterer and an energy compensator
(6). Such solutions are needed to keep the beam
current as low as possible, avoiding unnecessary activation
of components on the optical bench, as well as neutron
production. For a complete optimization, the scattering
system should also be adapted to the shape of each
beam to get minimal losses. A calculation method taking
into account symmetrical and asymmetrical beams is under
development. 
1.