
1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2013 Oct 11;5:55.

Biomarker-based prediction of progression in MCI: Comparison of AD signature and 
hippocampal volume with spinal fluid amyloid-β and tau.

Dickerson BC, Wolk DA; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Frontotemporal Dementia Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School Boston, MA, USA ; Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA ; Massachusetts Alzheimer's Disease
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Boston, MA, USA ; Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA.

Objective: New diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to
Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been developed using biomarkers aiming to establish
whether the clinical syndrome is likely due to underlying AD. We investigated the
utility of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
biomarkers in predicting progression from amnesic MCI to dementia, testing the
hypotheses that (1) markers of amyloid and neurodegeneration provide distinct and
complementary prognostic information over different time intervals, and that (2) 
evidence of neurodegeneration in amyloid-negative MCI individuals would be useful
prognostically. Methods: Data were obtained from the ADNI-1 (Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative Phase 1) database on all individuals with a baseline
diagnosis of MCI, baseline MRI and CSF data, and at least one follow-up visit.
MRI data were processed using a published set of a priori regions of interest to 
derive a measure known as the ``AD signature,'' as well as hippocampal volume.
The CSF biomarkers amyloid-β, total tau, and phospho tau were also examined. We
performed logistic regression analyses to identify the best baseline biomarker
predictors of progression to dementia over 1 or 3 years, and Cox regression
models to test the utility of these markers for predicting time-to-dementia.
Results: For prediction of dementia in MCI, the AD signature cortical thickness
biomarker performed better than hippocampal volume. Although CSF tau measures
were better than CSF amyloid-β at predicting dementia within 1 year, the AD
signature was better than all CSF measures at prediction over this relatively
short-term interval. CSF amyloid-β was superior to tau and AD signature at
predicting dementia over 3 years. When CSF amyloid-β was dichotomized using
previously published cutoff values and treated as a categorical variable, a
multivariate stepwise Cox regression model indicated that both the AD signature
MRI marker and the categorical CSF amyloid-β marker were useful in predicting
time-to-event diagnosis of AD dementia. Conclusion: In amnesic MCI, short-term (1
year) prognosis of progression to dementia relates strongly to baseline markers
of neurodegeneration, with the AD signature MRI biomarker of cortical thickness
performing the best among MRI and CSF markers studied here. Longer-term (3 year) 
prognosis in these individuals was better predicted by a marker indicative of
brain amyloid. Prediction of time-to-event in a survival model was predicted by
the combination of these biomarkers. These results provide further support for
emerging models of the temporal relationship of pathophysiologic events in AD and
demonstrate the utility of these biomarkers at the prodromal stage of the
illness.

PMID: 24130528  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

