
1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Oct 14. [Epub ahead of print]

A Rapid Gene Delivery-Based Mouse Model for Early-Stage Alzheimer Disease-Type
Tauopathy.

Siman R, Lin YG, Malthankar-Phatak G, Dong Y.

From the Department of Neurosurgery and Center for Brain Injury and Repair,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The perforant pathway projection from the entorhinal cortex (EC) to the
hippocampal dentate gyrus is critically important for long-term memory and
develops tau and amyloid pathologies and progressive degeneration starting in the
early stages of Alzheimer disease (AD). However, perforant pathway function has
not been assessed in experimental models of AD, and a therapeutic agent that
protects its structure and function has not yet been identified. Therefore, we
developed a new adeno-associated virus-based mouse model for perforant pathway
tauopathy. Microinjection into the lateral EC of vectors designed to express
either human tau bearing a pathogenic P301L mutation or enhanced green
fluorescent protein as a control selectively drove transgene expression in
lateral EC layer II perikarya and along the entire rostrocaudal extent of the
lateral perforant pathway afferents and dentate terminal field. After human tau
expression, hyperphosphorylated tau accumulated only within EC layer II
perikarya, thereby modeling Braak stage I of transentorhinal AD tauopathy.
Expression of pathologic human tau but not enhanced green fluorescent protein led
to specific dose-dependent apoptotic death of perforant pathway neurons and loss 
of synapses in as little as 2 weeks. This novel adeno-associated virus-based
method elicits rapid tauopathy and tau-mediated neurodegeneration localized to
the mouse perforant pathway and represents a new experimental approach for
studying tau-driven pathogenic processes and tau-based treatment strategies in a 
highly vulnerable neural circuit.

PMID: 24128676  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

