
1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Oct 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Abnormal Gephyrin Immunoreactivity Associated With Alzheimer Disease Pathologic
Changes.

Hales CM, Rees H, Seyfried NT, Dammer EB, Duong DM, Gearing M, Montine TJ,
Troncoso JC, Thambisetty M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Wingo TS.

From the Department of Neurology (CMH, HR, AIL, JJL, TSW), Center for
Neurodegenerative Disease (CMH, HR, NTS, EBD, DMD, MG, AIL, JJL, TSW),
Departments of Biochemistry (NTS) and Human Genetics (EBD, TSW), and Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine (MG), Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia; Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
(TJM); Departments of Pathology and Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland (JCT); National Institute of Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland (MT); and Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical
Center, Atlanta, Georgia (TSW).

Many neurodegenerative disorders involve the abnormal accumulation of proteins.
In addition to the pathologic hallmarks of neurofibrillary tangles and β-amyloid 
plaques in Alzheimer disease (AD), here we show that abnormal accumulations of
gephyrin, an inhibitory receptor-anchoring protein, are highly correlated with
the neuropathologic diagnosis of AD in 17 AD versus 14 control cases.
Furthermore, gephyrin accumulations were specific for AD and not seen in normal
controls or other neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson disease,
corticobasal degeneration, and frontotemporal degeneration. Gephyrin
accumulations in AD overlapped with β-amyloid plaques and, more rarely,
neurofibrillary tangles. Biochemical and proteomic studies of AD and control
brain samples suggested alterations in gephyrin solubility and reveal elevated
levels of gephyrin lower-molecular-weight species in the AD insoluble fraction.
Because gephyrin is involved in synaptic organization and synaptic dysfunction is
an early event in AD, these findings point to its possible role in the
pathogenesis of AD.

PMID: 24128675  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

