
1. J Clin Nurs. 2013 Oct 15. doi: 10.1111/jocn.12388. [Epub ahead of print]

Benefits of sensory garden and horticultural activities in dementia care: a
modified scoping review.

Gonzalez MT, Kirkevold M.

Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Institute of
Nursing and Health, Diakonhjemmet University College, Oslo, Norway.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To provide a review on the benefits associated with the use 
of sensory gardens and horticultural activities in dementia care.
BACKGROUND: Maintaining quality of life is important in dementia care. Sensory
gardens and horticultural activities are increasingly used in dementia care, yet 
their benefits are uncertain.
DESIGN: A modified scoping review with descriptive analysis of selected empirical
studies.
METHODS: Systematic searches in Amed, CINAHL, MEDLINE, ISI Web of Science, Embase
and Scopus were used. Search terms were the free-text concepts 'healing garden', 
'horticultural therapy', 'restorative garden' and 'wander garden' which were
combined with dementia and Alzheimer.
RESULTS: Sixteen studies were included with included participants ranging from
eight to 129 participants. Research designs were case studies (n = 2), survey
(n = 1), intervention studies with pretest/post-test design (n = 11) and
randomised controlled studies (n = 2). Of these 16 studies, eight examined the
benefits of sensory gardens, seven examined horticultural therapy or therapeutic 
horticulture and one examined the use of plants indoors. This study offers a
review of the research addressing benefits of sensory gardens, therapeutic
horticulture, horticultural therapy and other purposeful use of plants in
dementia care. The reported findings are mainly on issues related to behaviour,
affect and well-being. The findings are in general mutually supportive, however, 
with some contradictory findings. In addition, sleep pattern, well-being and
functional level seem to improve.
CONCLUSIONS: These types of nonpharmacological interventions may improve
well-being and affect and reduce the occurrence of disruptive behaviour.
Additionally, the use of psychotropic drugs, incidents of serious falls, sleep
and sleep pattern also seem to improve.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: To further improve the use of the existing or
planned gardens, an educational programme for staff that also includes skill
training is recommended.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24128125  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]

